# Spotify-Song-Genre-Classification

### Abstract

Over the last couple of decades, music has become an integral part of people's routines across the world. Irrespective of the language barrier, listening to music is considered a part of people's life especially while driving, cooking, at the gym, or at times during work for relaxation. Since every human is different, the choice of music varies from person to person and depends on an individual’s activity, age, and state of mind. Thus, it is critical to identify the selected song's genre so that the next few songs can be suggested based on the selected song. Therefore, developing an algorithm that can accurately classify the songs into different genres is imperative. This research uses Spotify data from Kaggle to perform an analysis and examine the accuracy of unsupervised and supervised machine learning models in making predictions. The process of dimensionality reduction of data using PCA is described in the study. K-means clustering is used to classify the genre of the songs, and hierarchical clustering techniques are used to enhance and identify the subgenre of the songs. K-Means has performed with an accuracy of 65%. Two supervised machine learning were developed to classify the songs into different genres, where the Logistic regression predicted with an accuracy of 77% and the random forest model predicted with an accuracy of 83% on the test data.

### Discussion on the results

The study shows the potential of using reduced dimensionality data using PCA, by retaining most of the data with 8 principal components having 90% of the information. It was observed that the primary and the secondary principal components (PC1 and PC2) capture most of the variance of the attribute’s “energy”, “loudness”, and “danceability” conveying that these are the most significant variables in the dataset. As part of this research, two supervised machine-learning models were developed for predicting the genre of the song. The first model using logistic regression has performed with an accuracy of 77% with a computational time of 0.036 sec and the second model using random forest has performed with an accuracy of 83% with a computational time of 0.15 sec. Additionally, a K-Means-based unsupervised machine learning algorithm that finds patterns and clusters songs based on features with a 65.7% accuracy and a computational time of 0.04 seconds was developed. To provide more precise genre predictions, the genre hierarchies option was considered in the classification model.

The performance of the random forest model is better than any other models used in the study and is computationally efficient. All the models perform well in classifying the “Rap” and “Emo” genres. While “Dark Trap” was challenging to predict in both supervised and unsupervised models

Due to the evolution of songs over time, artists have the freedom to explore different features. Therefore, it is challenging for supervised machine learning algorithms as music trends constantly change over time, whereas unsupervised models constantly learn and update the models from the data. The “time period” is also one of the important features that must be incorporated to see the evolution of the genre that we want to classify. In addition, when addressing such classification problems, incorporating additional audio features like lyrics, rhythm, and timbre becomes crucial.

